CONTRIBUTING.rst, before:

Contributor Guidelines
======================

GitHub Workflow
---------------

If you are a membed of the `Simons Observatory GitHub organisation <https://github.com/simonsobs>`_ then contributions can be made directly to the `SOLikeT repo <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket>`_.

If you are not a member of the Simons Observatory Collaboration with access to the GitHub org, you can still make contributions via forking this repo, with additional instructions below.


Clone the SOLikeT Repository
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**You should only need to do this step once**

Cloning creates a local copy of the repository on your computer to work with. To clone your fork:

::

   git clone https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket.git

**If you are not an SO GitHub org member**, first *fork* the SOLikeT repository. A fork is your own remote copy of the repository on GitHub. To create a fork:

  1. Go to the `SOLikeT GitHub Repository <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket>`_
  2. Click the **Fork** button (in the top-right-hand corner)
  3. Choose where to create the fork, typically your personal GitHub account

Next *clone* your fork. Cloning creates a local copy of the repository on your computer to work with. To clone your fork:

::

   git clone https://github.com/<your-account>/soliket.git


Finally add the ``simonsobs`` repository as a *remote*. This will allow you to fetch changes made to the codebase. To add the ``simonsobs`` remote:

::

  cd soliket
  git remote add simonsobs https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket.git


Create a branch for your new feature
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a *branch* off the master branch. Working on unique branches for each new feature simplifies the development, review and merge processes by maintining logical separation. Branch names should have names prefixed with `dev-` and reflect the work going on within them. To create a feature branch:

::

  git checkout -b <your-branch-name> master


**If you are not an SO GitHub org member**, create a *branch* off the ``simonsobs`` master branch. Working on unique branches for each new feature simplifies the development, review and merge processes by maintining logical separation. To create a feature branch:

::

  git fetch simonsobs
  git checkout -b <your-branch-name> simonsobs/master


Hack away!
^^^^^^^^^^

Write the new code you would like to contribute, remembering to abide by the `Code Style`_, and *commit* it to the feature branch on your local repository. Ideally commit small units of work often with clear and descriptive commit messages describing the changes you made. To commit changes to a file:

::

  git add file_containing_your_contribution
  git commit -m 'Your clear and descriptive commit message'

*Push* the contributions in your feature branch to your remote fork on GitHub:

::

  git push origin <your-branch-name>


**Note:** The first time you *push* a feature branch you will probably need to use `--set-upstream origin` to link to your remote fork:

::

  git push --set-upstream origin <your-branch-name>


Open a Pull Request
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When you feel that work on your new feature is complete, you should create a *Pull Request*. This will propose your work to be merged into the main SOLikeT repository.

  1. Go to `SOLikeT Pull Requests <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket/pulls>`_
  2. Click the green **New pull request** button
  3. Click **compare across forks**
  4. Confirm that the base fork is ``simonsobs/soliket`` and the base branch is ``master``
  5. If you are making a contribution from a forl, confirm the head fork is ``<your-account>/soliket`` and the compare branch is ``<your-branch-name>``
  6. Give your pull request a title and fill out the the template for the description
  7. Click the green **Create pull request** button

Status checks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A series of automated checks will be run on your pull request, some of which will be required to pass before it can be merged into the main codebase:

  - ``Tests`` (Required) runs the `unit tests`
  - ``Code Style`` (Required) runs `flake8 <https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/>`__ to check that your code conforms to the `PEP 8 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_ style guidelines. Click "Details" to view any errors.
..
  _ in four predefined environments; `latest supported versions`, `oldest supported versions`, `macOS latest supported` and `Windows latest supported`. Click "Details" to view the output including any failures.

  - ``codecov`` reports the test coverage for your pull request; you should aim for `codecov/patch — 100.00%`. Click "Details" to view coverage data.
  - ``docs`` (Required) builds the `docstrings`_ on `readthedocs <https://readthedocs.org/>`_. Click "Details" to view the documentation or the failed build log.

Updating your branch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As you work on your feature, new commits might be made to the ``simonsobs`` master branch. You will need to update your branch with these new commits before your pull request can be accepted. You can achieve this in a few different ways:

  - If your pull request has no conflicts, click **Update branch**
  - If your pull request has conflicts, click **Resolve conflicts**, manually resolve the conflicts and click **Mark as resolved**
  - *merge* the master branch from the command line:

    ::

        git fetch 
        git merge master

  - *rebase* your feature branch onto the ``simonsobs`` master branch from the command line:

    ::

        git fetch
        git rebase master

  - **If you are working on a fork** you will also need to specify that you updating from the ``simonsobs`` master branch:

    ::

        git fetch simonsobs
        git merge simonsobs/master

        git fetch simonsobs
        git rebase simonsobs/master


**Warning**: It is bad practice to *rebase* commits that have already been pushed to a remote such as your fork. Rebasing creates new copies of your commits that can cause the local and remote branches to diverge. ``git push --force`` will **overwrite** the remote branch with your newly rebased local branch. This is strongly discouraged, particularly when working on a shared branch where you could erase a collaborators commits.

For more information about resolving conflicts see the GitHub guides:
  - `Resolving a merge conflict on GitHub <https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/resolving-a-merge-conflict-on-github>`_
  - `Resolving a merge conflict using the command line <https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/resolving-a-merge-conflict-using-the-command-line>`_
  - `About Git rebase <https://help.github.com/en/github/using-git/about-git-rebase>`_

More Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

More information regarding the usage of GitHub can be found in the `GitHub Guides <https://guides.github.com/>`_.

Coding Guidelines
-----------------

Before your pull request can be merged into the codebase, it will be reviewed by one of the SOLikeT developers and required to pass a number of automated checks. Below are a minimum set of guidelines for developers to follow:

General Guidelines
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
..
  - All contributions should follow the `PEP8 Style Guide for Python Code <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_. We recommend using `flake8 <https://flake8.pycqa.org/>`__ to check your code for PEP8 compliance.
  - SOLikeT is compatible with Python>=3.6 (see `setup.cfg <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket/blob/master/setup.cfg>`_). SOLikeT *does not* support backwards compatibility with Python 2.x; `six`, `__future__` and `2to3` should not be used.
  - Importing SOLikeT should only depend on having `NumPy <https://www.numpy.org>`_, `SciPy <https://www.scipy.org/>`_ and `Astropy <https://www.astropy.org/>`__ installed.

Code Style
^^^^^^^^^^

All contributions should follow the `PEP8 Style Guide for Python Code <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_. When a PR is created for SOLikeT, a check will be run to make sure your code complies with these recommendations, which are the same as those specified for `Cobaya <https://cobaya.readthedocs.io/>`_. This means the following checks will be made:

::

  E713,E704,E703,E714,E741,E10,E11,E20,E22,E23,E25,E27,E301,E302,E304,E9,F405,F406,F5,F6,F7,F8,W1,W2,W3,W6

and a line length limit of 90 characters will be applied.

You may find it easier to run this check as locally before raising a PR. This can either be done by running:

::

  tox -e codestlye

in the SOLikeT root directory, or using the pre-commit hooks which are provided. These can be run before you make a local commit:

::

  pre-commit run --all-files

Before you run pre-commit the first time you will need to:

::

  pre-commit install


Unit Tests
^^^^^^^^^^

Pull requests will require existing unit tests to pass before they can be merged. Additionally, new unit tests should be written for all new public methods and functions. Unit tests for each likelihood are contained in subdirectories called ``tests`` and you can run them locally using ``pytest``. For more information see the `Astropy Testing Guidelines <https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/development/testguide.html>`_.

If your unit tests check the statistical distribution of a random sample, the test outcome itself is a random variable, and the test will fail from time to time. Please mark such tests with the ``@pytest.mark.flaky`` decorator, so that they will be automatically tried again on failure. To prevent non-random test failures from being run multiple times, please isolate random statistical tests and deterministic tests in their own test cases.


..
  Docstrings
  ^^^^^^^^^^
  
  All public classes, methods and functions require docstrings. You can build documentation locally by installing `sphinx-astropy <https://github.com/astropy/sphinx-astropy>`_ and calling ``make html`` in the ``docs`` subdirectory. Docstrings should include the following sections:

    - Description
    - Parameters
    - Notes
    - References

  For more information see the Astropy guide to `Writing Documentation <https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/development/docguide.html>`_.

Commit message:

readme and contrib changes based on review

CONTRIBUTING.rst, after:

Contributor Guidelines
======================

GitHub Workflow
---------------

If you are a membed of the `Simons Observatory GitHub organisation <https://github.com/simonsobs>`_ then contributions can be made directly to the `SOLikeT repo <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket>`_.

If you are not a member of the Simons Observatory Collaboration with access to the GitHub org, you can still make contributions via forking this repo, with additional instructions below.


Clone the SOLikeT Repository
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**You should only need to do this step once**

Cloning creates a local copy of the repository on your computer to work with. To clone your fork:

::

   git clone https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket.git

**If you are not an SO GitHub org member**, first *fork* the SOLikeT repository. A fork is your own remote copy of the repository on GitHub. To create a fork:

  1. Go to the `SOLikeT GitHub Repository <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket>`_
  2. Click the **Fork** button (in the top-right-hand corner)
  3. Choose where to create the fork, typically your personal GitHub account

Next *clone* your fork. Cloning creates a local copy of the repository on your computer to work with. To clone your fork:

::

   git clone https://github.com/<your-account>/soliket.git


Finally add the ``simonsobs`` repository as a *remote*. This will allow you to fetch changes made to the codebase. To add the ``simonsobs`` remote:

::

  cd soliket
  git remote add simonsobs https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket.git


Create a branch for your new feature
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a *branch* off the master branch. Working on unique branches for each new feature simplifies the development, review and merge processes by maintining logical separation. Branch names should have names prefixed with `dev-` and reflect the work going on within them. To create a feature branch:

::

  git checkout -b <your-branch-name> master


**If you are not an SO GitHub org member**, create a *branch* off the ``simonsobs`` master branch:

::

  git fetch simonsobs
  git checkout -b <your-branch-name> simonsobs/master


Hack away!
^^^^^^^^^^

Write the new code you would like to contribute, remembering to abide by the `Code Style`_, and *commit* it to the feature branch on your local repository. Ideally commit small units of work often with clear and descriptive commit messages describing the changes you made. To commit changes to a file:

::

  git add file_containing_your_contribution
  git commit -m 'Your clear and descriptive commit message'

*Push* the contributions in your feature branch to your remote fork on GitHub:

::

  git push origin <your-branch-name>


**Note:** The first time you *push* a feature branch you will probably need to use `--set-upstream origin` to link to your remote fork:

::

  git push --set-upstream origin <your-branch-name>


Open a Pull Request
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When you feel that work on your new feature is complete, you should create a *Pull Request*. This will propose your work to be merged into the main SOLikeT repository. If you would like feedback from others on active work in progress, even at an early stage, you can create a 'Draft' Pull Request at step 7. by choosing it from the drop-down menu. This will allow others to see and comment on your PR work in progress, which can be very helpful in getting it finished!

  1. Go to `SOLikeT Pull Requests <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket/pulls>`_
  2. Click the green **New pull request** button
  3. Click **compare across forks**
  4. Confirm that the base fork is ``simonsobs/soliket`` and the base branch is ``master``
  5. If you are making a contribution from a fork, confirm the head fork is ``<your-account>/soliket`` and the compare branch is ``<your-branch-name>``
  6. Give your pull request a title and fill out the the template for the description
  7. Click the green **Create pull request** button


Status checks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A series of automated checks will be run on your pull request, some of which will be required to pass before it can be merged into the main codebase:

  - ``Tests`` (Required) runs the `unit tests`
  - ``Code Style`` (Required) runs `flake8 <https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/>`__ to check that your code conforms to the `PEP 8 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_ style guidelines. Click "Details" to view any errors.
..
  _ in four predefined environments; `latest supported versions`, `oldest supported versions`, `macOS latest supported` and `Windows latest supported`. Click "Details" to view the output including any failures.

  - ``codecov`` reports the test coverage for your pull request; you should aim for `codecov/patch — 100.00%`. Click "Details" to view coverage data.
  - ``docs`` (Required) builds the `docstrings`_ on `readthedocs <https://readthedocs.org/>`_. Click "Details" to view the documentation or the failed build log.

Updating your branch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As you work on your feature, new commits might be made to the ``simonsobs`` master branch. You will need to update your branch with these new commits before your pull request can be accepted. You can achieve this in a few different ways:

  - If your pull request has no conflicts, click **Update branch**
  - If your pull request has conflicts, click **Resolve conflicts**, manually resolve the conflicts and click **Mark as resolved**
  - *merge* the master branch into your dev branch from the command line:

    ::

        git fetch 
        git merge master

  - *rebase* your feature branch onto the ``simonsobs`` master branch from the command line:

    ::

        git fetch
        git rebase master

  - **If you are working on a fork** you will also need to specify that you updating from the ``simonsobs`` master branch:

    ::

        git fetch simonsobs
        git merge simonsobs/master

        git fetch simonsobs
        git rebase simonsobs/master


**Warning**: You should take care to take this step and pull other contributors work to your branch before attempting any rebase.

For more information about resolving conflicts see the GitHub guides:
  - `Resolving a merge conflict on GitHub <https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/resolving-a-merge-conflict-on-github>`_
  - `Resolving a merge conflict using the command line <https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/resolving-a-merge-conflict-using-the-command-line>`_
  - `About Git rebase <https://help.github.com/en/github/using-git/about-git-rebase>`_

More Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

More information regarding the usage of GitHub can be found in the `GitHub Guides <https://guides.github.com/>`_.

Coding Guidelines
-----------------

Before your pull request can be merged into the codebase, it will be reviewed by one of the SOLikeT developers and required to pass a number of automated checks. Below are a minimum set of guidelines for developers to follow:

General Guidelines
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
..
  - All contributions should follow the `PEP8 Style Guide for Python Code <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_. We recommend using `flake8 <https://flake8.pycqa.org/>`__ to check your code for PEP8 compliance.
  - SOLikeT is compatible with Python>=3.6 (see `setup.cfg <https://github.com/simonsobs/soliket/blob/master/setup.cfg>`_). SOLikeT *does not* support backwards compatibility with Python 2.x; `six`, `__future__` and `2to3` should not be used.
  - Importing SOLikeT should only depend on having `NumPy <https://www.numpy.org>`_, `SciPy <https://www.scipy.org/>`_ and `Astropy <https://www.astropy.org/>`__ installed.

Code Style
^^^^^^^^^^

All contributions should follow the `PEP8 Style Guide for Python Code <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`_. When a PR is created for SOLikeT, a check will be run to make sure your code complies with these recommendations, which are the same as those specified for `Cobaya <https://cobaya.readthedocs.io/>`_. This means the following checks will be made:

::

  E713,E704,E703,E714,E741,E10,E11,E20,E22,E23,E25,E27,E301,E302,E304,E9,F405,F406,F5,F6,F7,F8,W1,W2,W3,W6

and a line length limit of 90 characters will be applied.

You may find it easier to run this check as locally before raising a PR. This can be done by running:

::

  tox -e codestlye

in the SOLikeT root directory.
Alternatively you can make use of the pre-commit hooks which are provided. If you run:

::

  pre-commit install

in the SOLikeT root directory, then these hooks will be installed. The code style checks will then be run each time you attempt a local commit, and you will not be able to perfom the commit unless they pass.

Unit Tests
^^^^^^^^^^

Pull requests will require existing unit tests to pass before they can be merged. Additionally, new unit tests should be written for all new public methods and functions. Unit tests for each likelihood are contained in subdirectories called ``tests`` and you can run them locally using ``pytest``. For more information see the `Astropy Testing Guidelines <https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/development/testguide.html>`_.

If your unit tests check the statistical distribution of a random sample, the test outcome itself is a random variable, and the test will fail from time to time. Please mark such tests with the ``@pytest.mark.flaky`` decorator, so that they will be automatically tried again on failure. To prevent non-random test failures from being run multiple times, please isolate random statistical tests and deterministic tests in their own test cases.


..
  Docstrings
  ^^^^^^^^^^
  
  All public classes, methods and functions require docstrings. You can build documentation locally by installing `sphinx-astropy <https://github.com/astropy/sphinx-astropy>`_ and calling ``make html`` in the ``docs`` subdirectory. Docstrings should include the following sections:

    - Description
    - Parameters
    - Notes
    - References

  For more information see the Astropy guide to `Writing Documentation <https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/development/docguide.html>`_.
